# How does ICP work?

This part explains how the Internet Computer Protocol works. It explains the different components of the protocol, how they interact with each other, and why they are designed this way. It targets readers who have some technical knowledge, but it does not require specialized knowledge on cloud or blockchain technology.

## Content structure

The articles in this section are divided into different topics and answer the following questions.

- [Blockchain Protocol](/hc/en-us/articles/34206453538964) - What are the core layers of the protocol and how do they make the Internet Computer tamperproof and unstoppable?
- [Canister Smart Contracts](/hc/en-us/articles/34210839162004) - How are decentralized applications on the Internet Computer managed and executed?
- [Chain-Key Cryptography](/hc/en-us/articles/34209486239252) - How do cryptographic protocols provide security and verifiability?
- [Tokenomics & Governance](/hc/en-us/articles/34574082263700) - What is behind the ICP token and how is the Internet Computer governed?
- [Chain Fusion](/hc/en-us/articles/34329023770260) - How can decentralized applications on the Internet Computer interact with blockchains like Ethereum and Bitcoin?
- [Evolution & Scaling](/hc/en-us/articles/34576974172692) - How can the Internet Computer extend its functionality and capacity?
- [The Internet Computer and the Internet](/hc/en-us/articles/34574399808788) - How the Internet Computer interacts with its users and with traditional web2 servers?

## Other resources

For more information on the following topics, we kindly refer you to consult other resources:

- In case you are a developer who is rather interested to **learn how to build applications on ICP**, please refer to the [developer documentation](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/home).
- If you are curious to see more **live information about the Internet Computer** that is running, such as which node machines are participating, please refer to [Internet Computer Dashboard](https://dashboard.internetcomputer.org/).
- If you want to learn what projects and applications have already been built on the Internet Computer, please refer to the [ecosystem page](https://internetcomputer.org/ecosystem).
