# DAO Settings

While all SNSs run the same code that is approved by the NNS, the *nervous system parameters* define the settings of a particular SNS. Since all SNSs are [upgraded along the same upgrade path](/hc/en-us/articles/34140764336788), this allows SNSs to customize the rules of their governance, the tokenomics, etc to meet their needs.

## The parameters

### `default_followees`

The set of default followees that every newly created neuron will follow per function. This is specified as a mapping of proposal functions to followees. If unset, neurons will have no followees by default. The number of followees for each function can be at most `max_followees_per_function`.

### `max_dissolve_delay_seconds`

The maximum dissolve delay that a neuron can have, given in seconds. That is, the maximum that a neuron's dissolve delay can be increased to. The maximum is also enforced when saturating the dissolve delay bonus in the voting power computation.

### `max_dissolve_delay_bonus_percentage`

E.g. if a large dissolve delay can double the voting power of a neuron, then this field would have a value of 100, indicating a maximum of 100% additional voting power.

For no bonus, this should be set to 0. To achieve functionality equivalent to the NNS, this should be set to 100.

### `max_followees_per_function`

The maximum number of followees each neuron can have for each nervous system function.

This number can be at most as large as the defined ceiling `MAX_FOLLOWEES_PER_FUNCTION_CEILING` (15 at time of writing).

### `neuron_claimer_permissions`

The default set of neuron permissions granted to the principal claiming a neuron.

### `neuron_minimum_stake_e8s`

The minimum number of e8s (10E-8 of a token) that can be staked in a neuron.

To ensure that staking and disbursing of the neuron work, the chosen value must be larger than the `transaction_fee_e8s` set in the SNS ledger canister.

### `max_neuron_age_for_age_bonus`

The maximum age of a neuron (defined in seconds) that saturates the age bonus for the voting power computation.

### `initial_voting_period_seconds`

The initial voting period of a proposal, given in seconds. Changing this parameter will not affect existing proposals.

### `neuron_minimum_dissolve_delay_to_vote_seconds`

The minimum dissolve delay, defined in seconds, that a neuron must have to be eligible to vote. The chosen value must be smaller than `max_dissolve_delay_seconds`.

### `reject_cost_e8s`

The number of e8s (10E-8 of a token) that a rejected proposal costs the proposer.

### `max_proposals_to_keep_per_action`

The maximum number of proposals to keep, per action (i.e., proposal type). When the total number of proposals for a given action is greater than this number, the oldest proposals that have reached final decision state (rejected, executed, or failed) and final rewards status state (settled) may be deleted.

The number must be larger than zero and at most as large as the defined ceiling `MAX_PROPOSALS_TO_KEEP_PER_ACTION_CEILING` (700 at time of writing).

### `wait_for_quiet_deadline_increase_seconds`

A parameter of the wait-for-quiet algorithm that increases the voting period of a proposal if it is controversial and changes the voting outcome. A proposal's voting period starts with `initial_voting_period_seconds` seconds and will be incresed at most by two twice the seconds defined in `wait_for_quiet_deadline_increase_seconds`.
Changing this parameter does not affect existing proposals.

### `max_number_of_neurons`

The maximum number of allowed neurons. When this maximum is reached, no new neurons will be created until some are removed.

This number must be larger than zero and at most as large as the defined ceiling `MAX_NUMBER_OF_NEURONS_CEILINGM` (200\_000 at time of writing).

### `transaction_fee_e8s`

The transaction fee, in 10E-8 of an SNS token, that must be paid for ledger transactions (except minting and burning governance tokens).

### `max_number_of_proposals_with_ballots`

The max number of proposals for which ballots are still stored, i.e., unsettled proposals. If this number of proposals is reached, new proposals can only be added in exceptional cases (for few proposals it is defined that they are allowed even if resources are low to guarantee that the relevant canisters can be upgraded).

This number must be larger than zero and at most as large as the defined ceiling `MAX_NUMBER_OF_PROPOSALS_WITH_BALLOTS_CEILING` (700 at time of writing).

### `max_age_bonus_percentage`

Analogous to `max_dissolve_delay_bonus_percentage`, but this one relates to neuron age instead of dissolve delay.

To achieve functionality equivalent to the NNS, this should be set to 25.

### `neuron_grantable_permissions`

The superset of neuron permissions a principal with permission `NeuronPermissionType::ManagePrincipals` for a given neuron can grant to another principal for this same neuron. If this set changes via a `ManageNervousSystemParameters` proposal, previous neurons' permissions will be unchanged and only newly granted permissions will be affected.

### `voting_rewards_parameters`

When this field is not populated, voting rewards are "disabled". Changing this should be evaluated carefully as it might be hard to understand rewards if they change.

The reward parameters are:

```
final_reward_rate_basis_points : opt nat64;
initial_reward_rate_basis_points : opt nat64;
reward_rate_transition_duration_seconds : opt nat64;
round_duration_seconds : opt nat64;
```

### `maturity_modulation_disabled`

By default, maturity modulation (which is the same as in the NNS - see [here](/hc/en-us/articles/34084120668692)) is enabled; however, an SNS can use this field to disable it. When disabled, this canister will still poll the Cycles Minting Canister (CMC), and store the value received from there.
However, the fetched value is not used when this setting is set to true.

The reason this is called "disabled" instead of (positive) "enabled" is so that the protobuf default (bool fields are false) and our application default (enabled) agree.

### `max_number_of_principals_per_neuron`

The maximum number of principals that can have permissions for a neuron.

### `automatically_advance_target_version`

A boolean defining whether to automatically advance the SNS target version after a new upgrade is approved an published by the NNS. If set to true, this has the effect that the SNS is always automatically upgraded to the latest available version that was approved by the NNS. See also [Framework and Architecture](/hc/en-us/articles/34140764336788) for details how SNS framework canisters are upgraded.

If not specified, the value defaults to false for backward compatibility. For newly launched SNSs, the value defaults to true.
